---
layout: post
cover: assets/images/work/eyegenix_square_logo.png
title: Eyegenix LLC
date: 2015-08-01
categories: experience
author: Lambert
featured: false
permalink: experience/eyegenix
comments: true
labels:
    - Bio-Engineered Cornea
    - Cell/Tissue Culture 
    - Polymer Chemistry
    - R&D
    - Manufacturing
    - Medical Device, Class II
tags: cornea artificial polymer 

summary: Eyegenix LLC was a start up located in Honolulu Hawaii with the mission to cure corneal blindness. The cornea is the most transplanted organ worldwide and at Eyegenix we developed a bio-synthetic transplantable cornea.  Our class II medical device's advantage over donor corneas in that host versus graft interactions were non-issue.  

---

**Overview**

I worked for Eyegenix from 2015 to 2018 as a researcher.  Eyegenix was a biotech
start up company located in Honolulu Hawaii that developed bio-engineered
corneas (BEC).  We often collaborated and sub-contracted efforts out to those at
Johns Hopkins  Wilmer Eye Institute.  Together with parallel efforts we
developed BECs that were sucessful in live transplant.  I held two roles while
working at Eyegenix.  I was a part of the manufacturing team and I was incharge
of running biocompatibility assays on developed BECs.

**Manufacturing**

The BEC cosisted of a protein polymer base and units were shaped using injection
molding.  Eyegenix was in posession of one of two clean rooms on the island of
Oahu and this is where units were manufatured.Manufacturing required great
dexterity along with familiarity with the feel and viscosity of the polymer
during the cross linking stage.  As a result, units were manufactured by hand
and attempts to automate presented more problems than solutions. As a part of
the manufaturing team, I was granted the privilege of working with the polymer
and building units for transplant. Additionally, I participated in the
development of new polymer formulations.  New polymers were formulated with a
goal to improve strength, elasticity, biocompatibility, and clarity.  Deriving
new formulations allowed me to exercise my biochemistry knowledge in a way that
produced tangible and testible results.

<script async src="https://pagead2.googlesyndication.com/pagead/js/adsbygoogle.js"></script>
<ins class="adsbygoogle"
     style="display:block; text-align:center;"
     data-ad-layout="in-article"
     data-ad-format="fluid"
     data-ad-client="ca-pub-4379410432613892"
     data-ad-slot="8398952705"></ins>
<script>
     (adsbygoogle = window.adsbygoogle || []).push({});
</script>

**Biocompatibility Testing** 

I was originally hired to performe cell and tissue culture task.  Test were
performed in a bio-safety level 2 rated lab using imortalized human and primary
rabbit cornea epithelial cells. Two biocompatibility assays were develped to
assess how BECs will perform in-vivo.  

The first test was called a direct contact assay which tested the accute
bio-compatibility of our BEC.  Cells were placed on the BEC and left to grow for
a seven days.  After 7 days, the living cells were quantified using spectoscopy
and MTT.  The second assay was the cell migration assay which evaluated how well
BEC materials promote cell migration to cover the material.  An area in the
middle of the test BEC was occluded and cells were places on the covered portion
of the bec.  Image analysis with the NIH's imageJ was used to quantify migration
rates over the BEC surface.  Images were taken under a microscope at periodic
time points.

While working in tissues culture, I was able to practice and improve my wet lab
skills.  Contamination is always a conern when performing tissue culture and I
was able to perfect my sterile technique.  I also learned to maintain a proper
inventory as well as a clean and sterile work space.

