---
layout: essay
type: essay
published: true
title: Working toGITher
image: 
date: 2016-09-15
labels:
    -   Git
    -   GitHub
    -   Configuration Managment

---

Technology has made it easier for large groups of people to work on the same project.  The individuals working on the project do not necessarily have to be in the same general location and working on the project at the same time thanks to technology and configuration management.  Individuals with a great amount of expertise in particular areas can be recruited from anywhere to work on projects which would lead to a better end product.  Configuration management has taken the head ache out of keeping track of changes in design and function while maintaining consistency in ongoing projects.   Efficiency and precision are increase as a result of good configuration management platforms and practices.

At my current company, we are required to compose annual, quarterly, and monthly reports which discuss our research findings for the designated period of work.  Unfortunately, we do not practice good configuration management and do not have an efficient platform for composing these reports.  While changes are tracked to a certain degree, individuals are unable to contribute to the document while others are using it.  In addition, formatting properties are not preserved when changes are made and thus, someone has to compile the final document and reformat the entire document.  Productivity could be increased with the help of a good configuration management platform.

Git and GitHub are useful configuration management tools for the development of software.  Git provides good version control over current work and GitHub provides a streamlined platform for Git.  It is hard to determine whether the popularity of Git is attributed to GitHub or if GitHub’s popularity is the result of popularity with Git.  The popularity of Git and GitHub is like that of a symbiotic relationship in which the existence and popularity of one complements and helps the other.  GitHub is a great platform for GIt and it promotes collaboration and a good sense of community amongst its users. The use of Git and GitHub has expedited the software development process.  Similar configuration management tools and platforms, like GIt and GitHub, in other aspects of industry will help increase productivity in those respective industries.

