---
layout: essay
type: essay
published: true
title: The Code Standard
image: 
date: 2016-09-22
labels:
    -   IntelliJ
    -   ESLint
    -   Coding Standards

---

Programing essentially involves writing instructions in the form of code that a machine can understand and execute accordingly.  The way in which a computer interprets code is often personified and compared to the way humans read text.  Humans read from text in one direction and thoughts are often grouped together in sentences and paragraphs.  Computers, more or less, read code in a similar fashion and instead of sentences and paragraphs, ideas are organized into lines and functions.  However, unlike common, written text where formatting and organization is important in conveying the writers message to the reader, code is can be formatted and organized in different ways while still executing the same operations.  Different people may format and organize their code differently which leads to an inconsistency in formatting amongst different programmers.  These inconsistences present problems when people, other than the originator, try to read and work on code written by someone else.  Coding standards help to remedy inconsistent formatting and organization.

More often than not other individuals, other than the originator, look over and work on a program or a piece of code.  It has become more common, especially with the increasing popularity of configuration management systems, to have multiple collaborators on one project which makes the use of coding standards more vital to the efficiency and overall success of a project.  If everyone agrees to abide by a particular coding standard when programing, it would make it easier for others to quickly understand code written by someone else.  The build and debugging process is often slowed down because individuals are unable to quickly orient themselves in others peoples code that are formatted and organized differently than their own.  Writing of text is a perfect example of how a composition standard makes it easy for virtually anyone who can read to understand.  For example, almost all readers will understand what an author is saying buy the syntax, use of punctuation, and formatting.

Just as it is hard to teach an old dog new tricks, it is at first difficult to adapt to a coding standard when I’ve been coding a particular way for a while.  At first obtaining a green check mark in IntelliJ with ESLint was frustrating.  As I continue to code in this environment however, I feel that I will become more accustom to this particular coding standard.  I often try to abide by the coding standard as I am composing my code but when I am under a time constraint, I often get the logic down and my program to work before satisfying the coding standard.  While learning to abide by this coding standard has impacted the productivity of my classmates, it will become easier to help each other out in the future because we will be able to quickly orient ourselves in code that is written in a similar style to our own.  
