---
layout: essay
type: essay
published: True
title: Presenting at Radiological Society of North America (RSNA) 2019
permalink: essays/rsna_2019
image: 
date: 2019-12-02
labels:
  - Radiological Society of North America
  - RSNA
  - Breast Cancer Research
  - National Conference
  - Artificial Intelligence
  - Machine Learning
  - University of Hawaii Cancer Center
  - Professional Developement
---
1. [__Abstract__](http://archive.rsna.org/2019/19011841.html)
2. [__Presentation__](../docs/lleong_rsna19_oral.pdf)


After joining [John Shepherd](https://shepherdresearchlab.org/about/our-team/)
and his team at the University of Hawaii Cancer Center in November of 2018, I
had begun working on a dual X-ray mammography project known as the [3 Compartment
Breast (3CB)](https://shepherdresearchlab.org/research/3cb/).  The goal of 3CB
is to be able to separately view the different tissue components of the breast
and possible lesions.  These components include lipid, water, and protein. In
order to accurately derive the three components, accurate geometrical and
thickness measurements of the breast is needed.  My work consisted of developing
a technique to accurately estimate the breast measurements that were need for our 3CB
algorithm.

Abstracts for the Radiological Society of North America (RSNA) annual conference
we due in the April and we believed that this would be a good opportunity to
present my work and for me to gain exposure to the field of radiology.  My abstract was
accepted and I was awarded an oral presentation in the beast imaging physic
session held on Monday, December 02, 2019.

After being notified that I had been awarded an oral for RSNA 19, I applied for
the University of Hawaii Cancer Center's Trainee Travel grant.  I was fortunate
to receive the maximum funding for the award.  I am appreciative and grateful to
the University of Hawaii Cancer Center for the award because it has allowed me
to gain valuable experience.

The trip to RSNA consisted of a bunch of first for me.  It was the first time
that I had an abstract accepted, it was my first, first authored work, it was
the first time attending a conference of this scale and size, it was the first
time speaking in front of an audience of that size, and it was my first time to
Chicago.  I owe it to Dr. Shepherd and the rest of the team for helping me with
the practicing of my talk and helping me practice fielding potentially hard
questions.  I went into my talk confident and the presentation went well.  I was
able calmly and clearly answer the questions that were posed to me about my
work.  It turned out to be a fun experience despite how nervous I was given it
was my first time and the audience was large. I have grown from this experience
and am excited and motivated to get back to the research so that I can have another
opportunity like this again.

I spent time attending other speaker sessions and reviewing the poster
presentations.  Since the majority of my focus for my dissertation and research
is centered around breast imaging and the use of machine learning and artificial
intelligence (AI), my attendance was focused around those topics.  I got to learn
about the work and advanced that were being made in the field of radiology as a
whole, as well as, in the specific fields of breast imaging and AI. 

To my delightful surprise, the rest of my time at RSNA was spent talking to
vendors, clinicians, and existing and potential research collaborators.  I was
fortunate to be included in many conversations that took place between
clinicians, companies, and us, the researchers.  Being a part of the discourse
was a unique and valuable experience in that we get to see the impact of our
work and what work still needs to be done.  When meeting the various companies,
we get to learn about the latest and greatest technologies that are on the
market or in development.  We had many discussions with companies on how we can
initiate or further our collaborations using their products and/or helping to
develop new ones.  All companies and products that were at RSNA are the
extension of some research work done by researchers just like us and it is eye
opening to see one potential end product of our work.  Meetings with clinicians
help us to understand how our research relates to the level of patient care.
It also allows us to learn about the disparities within healthcare that our
efforts should be focused on addressing.  It is common that some research
efforts do not translate when moving from the bench top to the bedside and these
conversations with clinicians help us to identify when this is happening so that
we can work towards a solution.  Lastly, we also met with other fellow research
team to discuss our current work and the potential for collaboration.  These
conversations were valuable and they allowed me to see view the healthcare,
specifically radiology, field from many perspectives that I am not sure I would
have seen by staying on island nor in the lab.  As a student in the Molecular
Bioscience and Bioengineering department at the University of Hawaii at Manoa
and as a researcher who represents the University of Hawaii Cancer Center,
Shepherd Research Lab, and the AI Precision Health Institute, we strive to build
translational AI models targeted at helping the people of Hawaii.  My trip to
RSNA and the trainee travel grant has allowed me to gain valuable knowledge and
experience that has oriented me in a good position to accomplish my goals.

---

The following is a short accounting and notes of meeting and iterations that took place

1. Volpara
	- We have a Volpara machine for measuring breast density screening
	- A new breast density software is being released
		- New risk scoring system
			- Tyrer Cusik score
			- Helps radiologist triage cases
	- contact Peter Graham

2. Hologic
	- Discussed status of current collaborative projects
		- DXA whole body and bone, Dakine study

3. Phillips
	- Spectral iQon CT system demo
		- Dual energy ct system
			- Dual detector technology
		- Great potential for body compositional research

4. General Electric
	- Updates on tomosynthesis breast project
		- Compositional and Computer-Aided Detection (CAD) study updates
	- VAT project update
	- contact Serge Muller

	- GE's dual ct system
		- Dual energy system
	- contact Mike Teramoto

5. Bilal
	- Breast ultrasound
	- Light/laser acoustic imaging
	- Potential to extend compositional breast work

6. University of Chicago Breast Researchers
	- Discussing current results for CAD composition analysis
	- Game planning to extend 3CB for detection
	- Strategizing for further funding
	- contact Maryellen Geiger and Karen Drukker

7. iCAD inc
	- Presented results on CAD and compositional breast
		- Work was done on older software
	- Discussed future work 
		- Discussed getting new versions for software to continue
		  analysis
			- Tomo 3D software
	- contact Senthil , Jeff , Johnathan , Jennifer

8. Quibim
	- Medical AI platform
	- Angle (owner and CEO)  gave talked at University of Hawaii Cancer
	  Center
	
9. Artesy
	- AI market place
		- Like youtube for testing and deploying medical AI models
	- Potential place to host and test our developed models

10. Nividia
	- We have 2 of their most powerful AI machines (DGX-1)
	- Discussed new products that are supported by our machines
		- Clara - medical AI platform
		- Data curration with XNAT
		- Federated learning potentials

11. Zebra
	- 4 FDA approved AI algorithms
	- Fracture risk
		- Potential collaboration

__MORE TO COME, STAY TUNED!__

<br>
