---
layout: essay
type: essay
published: true
title: Thoughts on JavaScript
date: 2016-09-01
labels:
  - JavaScript
  - ICS 314Classwork
  - Learning
---
Prior to taking software engineering I had only done minimal coding in JavaScript.  As a matter of fact, JavaScript was what got me interested in computer science and convinced me to refocus my studies from biology to computer science.  On my own free time, I had practiced and worked through many online modules that taught JavaScript and instantly I was hooked.  It was an easy language to pick up and it also didn’t require me to download any extra compilers or integrated development environments (IDE) to get started.  When first learning javascript, all the coding was performed in the browser which was convenient and beneficial because I could learn a lesson, practice it immediately by coding it, and then receive instant feedback.
I have taken many computer science classes but unfortunately I haven’t done any coding in javascript since I first started exploring online coding tutorials.  The majority of my coding, thus far, has been in java and C/C++.  I like coding in both languages and wouldn’t say I have a strong preference for one or the other.  However, if I had to choose I would say C because java does have it “quirks”.  The biggest difference I’ve noticed thus far about JavaScript is that it is a scripting language whereas, java and C/C++ are both compiling languages.  I would have to do more coding in javascript to be able to have a more intuitive idea about the pros and cons of a scripting language versus and compiling language.   For the most part, the syntax and general structure is not that far off from java which makes it easier to transition from one language to another.  I enjoy the fact that you don’t have to specify the data type of variables which makes it faster to code.  However, I could see where this could be a problem down the road with bigger projects and multiple functions are accessing and possible changing different variables.  The use of the key words “let” and “const” should help minimize this problem along with naming variable appropriately and specifically.  

I am not sure yet if Javascript is necessarily good or bad for software engineering.  I think its usefulness is attributed to the task at hand.  Javascript seems to be useful for web development and apps that run the web browsers.  However, I’m sure there are instances where software engineers need a compiling language like C or Java to write software.  It would benefit any aspiring software engineer and computer scientist to be well versed in both scripting and compiling languages so that they have the flexibility to build software and code for any given situation.  

Word Outs of the Day or WODs is a concept taken from crossfit.  WODs in crossfit contain different sets of workouts that are targeted to help individuals become stronger in certain areas.  This acronym and concept has been adapted to our software engineering class and are essentially meant to do the same thing.  WODs, in software engineering, are meant to get students to work on skills and preform under   simulated real world conditions.  While they are stressful, they are, for the most part, beneficial.  Doing the practice WODs prior to the actual WOD was useful because it helped me brush up on concepts that are necessary for the actual WOD.  It is a decent style of learning that can be improved if we go over the solutions soon after we have finished.  I think it would be useful to get instant feedback on our work so that we can immediately think about how to improve for the next one.                    
